README.md, before:

---
description: >-
  Thunderbird is likely the largest open source Email client in terms of the
  amount of users. It is based on the Mozilla platform that Firefox is also
  built on. These docs teach you how to contribute!
---

# About Thunderbird

## I Want to Start Hacking

This page has some information on where to get information and get plugged into the Community. If you are ready to start hacking, head to this page:

{% page-ref page="the-basics/getting-started.md" %}

## Report Bugs and Request Features

### [Bugzilla](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org)

Thunderbird uses Mozilla's Bugzilla platform to report and track bugs. The site can also be used to generate enhancement bugs, which can be used for feature requests. If you want to become a contributor to Thunderbird, you will need an account on Bugzilla as you will submit patches through this platform.

### [Thundernest on GitHub](https://github.com/thundernest)

If you want to contribute to the Thunderbird website, this documentation, or addons.thunderbird.net - you can find those repositories and their issue trackers on the Thundernest GitHub page. You'll need a GitHub account ot contribute there.

## Getting Plugged into the Community

We have a complete listing of the ways in which you can get involved with Thunderbird [on our website](https://thunderbird.net/get-involved). Below are some quick references from that page that you can use if you are looking to contribute to Thunderbird core right away.

### Mailing Lists

If you want to participate in discussions about Thunderbird development, there are two main mailing lists you want to join.

1. [**TB-Planning**](https://wiki.mozilla.org/Thunderbird/tb-planning)**:** This mailing list is higher level topics like: the future of Thunderbird, potential features, and changes that you would like to see happen. It is also used to discuss a variety of broader issues around community and governance of the project.
2. [**Maildev**](http://lists.thunderbird.net/mailman/listinfo/maildev_lists.thunderbird.net)**:** A moderated mailing list for discussing engineering plans for Thunderbird. It is a place where you can raise questions and ideas for core Thunderbird development.

### IRC

If you want to ask questions about how to hack on Thunderbird, the IRC channel you want to join is [\#maildev on irc.mozilla.org](irc://irc.mozilla.org/maildev).

Commit message:

Reference extension documentation
I'm not sure if this is entirely the correct place or a great text to embed the extension docs link, but I think linking out to the extension docs should definitely happen - unless they get moved to this, too.

README.md, after:

---
description: >-
  Thunderbird is likely the largest open source Email client in terms of the
  amount of users. It is based on the Mozilla platform that Firefox is also
  built on. These docs teach you how to contribute!
---

# About Thunderbird

## I Want to Start Hacking

This page has some information on where to get information and get plugged into the Community. If you are ready to start hacking, head to this page:

{% page-ref page="the-basics/getting-started.md" %}

### Extension Development

The [Extension API](https://thunderbird-webextensions.readthedocs.io/) documentation covers available APIs and guides to move to the new set of APIs.

## Report Bugs and Request Features

### [Bugzilla](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org)

Thunderbird uses Mozilla's Bugzilla platform to report and track bugs. The site can also be used to generate enhancement bugs, which can be used for feature requests. If you want to become a contributor to Thunderbird, you will need an account on Bugzilla as you will submit patches through this platform.

### [Thundernest on GitHub](https://github.com/thundernest)

If you want to contribute to the Thunderbird website, this documentation, or addons.thunderbird.net - you can find those repositories and their issue trackers on the Thundernest GitHub page. You'll need a GitHub account ot contribute there.

## Getting Plugged into the Community

We have a complete listing of the ways in which you can get involved with Thunderbird [on our website](https://thunderbird.net/get-involved). Below are some quick references from that page that you can use if you are looking to contribute to Thunderbird core right away.

### Mailing Lists

If you want to participate in discussions about Thunderbird development, there are two main mailing lists you want to join.

1. [**TB-Planning**](https://wiki.mozilla.org/Thunderbird/tb-planning)**:** This mailing list is higher level topics like: the future of Thunderbird, potential features, and changes that you would like to see happen. It is also used to discuss a variety of broader issues around community and governance of the project.
2. [**Maildev**](http://lists.thunderbird.net/mailman/listinfo/maildev_lists.thunderbird.net)**:** A moderated mailing list for discussing engineering plans for Thunderbird. It is a place where you can raise questions and ideas for core Thunderbird development.

### IRC

If you want to ask questions about how to hack on Thunderbird, the IRC channel you want to join is [\#maildev on irc.mozilla.org](irc://irc.mozilla.org/maildev).
