thunderbird-development/building-thunderbird/README.md, before:

---
description: How to build and run Thunderbird.
---

# Building Thunderbird

## Hardware Requirements

* At least **4 GB of RAM**. 8 GB or more is recommended. While you can build Thunderbird on older hardware it can take quite a bit of time to compile on slower machines with less RAM.
* Good internet connection for the initial source download.

## Build Prerequisites

Depending on your Operating System you will need to carry out a different process to prepare your machine. So firstly complete the instructions for your OS and then continue following these build instructions.

* [Windows Build Prerequisites](windows-build-prerequisites.md)
* [Linux Build Prerequisites](linux-build-prerequisites.md)
* [macOS Build Prerequisites](macos-build-prerequisites.md)

## Build Configuration

To build Thunderbird, you need to create a file named `mozconfig` to the root directory of the mozilla-central checkout that contains the option `comm\mail` enabled. You can create a file with this line by doing this in the `source/` directory:

```text
echo 'ac_add_options --enable-application=comm/mail' > mozconfig
echo 'ac_add_options --with-app-basename=Thunderbird' >> mozconfig
```

**If you omit these lines, the build system will build Firefox instead**. Other build configuration options can be added to this file, although it's **strongly recommended** that you only use options that you fully understand. For example, to create a debug build instead of a release build, that file would also contain the line:

```text
echo 'ac_add_options --enable-debug' >> mozconfig
```

_Each of these ac\_add\_options entries needs to be on its own line._

For more on configuration options, see the page [Configuring build options](https://developer.mozilla.org/en/Configuring_Build_Options). Note that if you use an MOZ\_OBJDIR it cannot be a sibling folder to your source directory. Use an absolute path to be sure!

## Building

{% hint style="warning" %}
Before you start, make sure that the version you checked out is not busted. For `hg` tip, you should see green Bs on [https://treeherder.mozilla.org/\#/jobs?repo=comm-central](https://treeherder.mozilla.org/#/jobs?repo=comm-central)
{% endhint %}

To start the build, cd into the `source` directory, and run:

```text
./mach build
```

mach is our command-line tool to streamline common developer tasks. See the [mach](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Developer_guide/mach) article for more.

Building can take a significant amount of time, depending on your system, OS, and chosen build options. Linux builds on a fast box may take under _15 minutes_, but Windows builds on a slow box may take _several hours_.

### Make Your Build Faster

Follow this guide to rely on `ccache` and other [Tips for making builds faster](../getting-started.md).

## Running Thunderbird

To run your build, you can use:

```text
./mach run
```

There are various command line parameters you can add, e.g. to specify a profile.

Various temporary files, libraries, and the Thunderbird executable will be found in your object directory \(under `comm-central/`\), which is prefixed with `obj-`. The exact name depends on your system and OS. For example, a Mac user may get an object directory name of `obj-x86_64-apple-darwin10.7.3/`.

The Thunderbird executable in particular, and its dependencies are located under the `dist/bin` folder under the object directory. To run the executable from your `comm-central` working directory:

* Windows: `obj-.../dist/bin/thunderbird.exe`
* Linux: `obj-.../dist/bin/thunderbird`
* macOS: `obj-.../dist/Daily.app/Contents/MacOS/thunderbird`

## Update and Build Again

To pull down the latest changes, in the mozilla directory run the following commands:

```text
hg pull -u
cd comm
hg pull -u
cd ..
```

or to do it via one command:

```text
hg pull -u; (cd comm; hg pull -u)
```

Then just run the `./mach build` command detailed in the [Building](./#building) instructions above. This will only recompile files that changed, but it may still take a long time.

## Rebuilding

To build after changes you can simply run:

```text
./mach build
```

### Rebuilding Specific Parts

If you have made many changes, but only want to rebuild specific parts, you may run the following commands.

#### C or C++ Files:

```text
./mach build binaries
```

#### JavaScript or XUL Files \(Windows Only\):

```text
./mach build path/to/dir
```

{% hint style="info" %}
Replace `path/to/dir` with the directory with the files changed.

This is the tricky bit since you need to specify the directory that installs the files, which may be a parent directory of the changed file's directory. For example, to just rebuild the Lightning calendar extension:

```text
./mach build comm/calendar/lightning
```
{% endhint %}

Commit message:

Hint to the build prerequisites before first ./mach build

thunderbird-development/building-thunderbird/README.md, after:

---
description: How to build and run Thunderbird.
---

# Building Thunderbird

## Hardware Requirements

* At least **4 GB of RAM**. 8 GB or more is recommended. While you can build Thunderbird on older hardware it can take quite a bit of time to compile on slower machines with less RAM.
* Good internet connection for the initial source download.

## Build Prerequisites

Depending on your Operating System you will need to carry out a different process to prepare your machine. So firstly complete the instructions for your OS and then continue following these build instructions.

* [Windows Build Prerequisites](windows-build-prerequisites.md)
* [Linux Build Prerequisites](linux-build-prerequisites.md)
* [macOS Build Prerequisites](macos-build-prerequisites.md)

## Build Configuration

To build Thunderbird, you need to create a file named `mozconfig` to the root directory of the mozilla-central checkout that contains the option `comm\mail` enabled. You can create a file with this line by doing this in the `source/` directory:

```text
echo 'ac_add_options --enable-application=comm/mail' > mozconfig
echo 'ac_add_options --with-app-basename=Thunderbird' >> mozconfig
```

**If you omit these lines, the build system will build Firefox instead**. Other build configuration options can be added to this file, although it's **strongly recommended** that you only use options that you fully understand. For example, to create a debug build instead of a release build, that file would also contain the line:

```text
echo 'ac_add_options --enable-debug' >> mozconfig
```

_Each of these ac\_add\_options entries needs to be on its own line._

For more on configuration options, see the page [Configuring build options](https://developer.mozilla.org/en/Configuring_Build_Options). Note that if you use an MOZ\_OBJDIR it cannot be a sibling folder to your source directory. Use an absolute path to be sure!

## Building

{% hint style="warning" %}
Before you start, make sure that the version you checked out is not busted. For `hg` tip, you should see green Bs on [https://treeherder.mozilla.org/\#/jobs?repo=comm-central](https://treeherder.mozilla.org/#/jobs?repo=comm-central)
{% endhint %}

After you met the [build prerequisites](#build-prerequisites) for your OS the build is started in the `source` directory with:

```text
./mach build
```

mach is our command-line tool to streamline common developer tasks. See the [mach](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Developer_guide/mach) article for more.

Building can take a significant amount of time, depending on your system, OS, and chosen build options. Linux builds on a fast box may take under _15 minutes_, but Windows builds on a slow box may take _several hours_.

### Make Your Build Faster

Follow this guide to rely on `ccache` and other [Tips for making builds faster](../getting-started.md).

## Running Thunderbird

To run your build, you can use:

```text
./mach run
```

There are various command line parameters you can add, e.g. to specify a profile.

Various temporary files, libraries, and the Thunderbird executable will be found in your object directory \(under `comm-central/`\), which is prefixed with `obj-`. The exact name depends on your system and OS. For example, a Mac user may get an object directory name of `obj-x86_64-apple-darwin10.7.3/`.

The Thunderbird executable in particular, and its dependencies are located under the `dist/bin` folder under the object directory. To run the executable from your `comm-central` working directory:

* Windows: `obj-.../dist/bin/thunderbird.exe`
* Linux: `obj-.../dist/bin/thunderbird`
* macOS: `obj-.../dist/Daily.app/Contents/MacOS/thunderbird`

## Update and Build Again

To pull down the latest changes, in the mozilla directory run the following commands:

```text
hg pull -u
cd comm
hg pull -u
cd ..
```

or to do it via one command:

```text
hg pull -u; (cd comm; hg pull -u)
```

Then just run the `./mach build` command detailed in the [Building](./#building) instructions above. This will only recompile files that changed, but it may still take a long time.

## Rebuilding

To build after changes you can simply run:

```text
./mach build
```

### Rebuilding Specific Parts

If you have made many changes, but only want to rebuild specific parts, you may run the following commands.

#### C or C++ Files:

```text
./mach build binaries
```

#### JavaScript or XUL Files \(Windows Only\):

```text
./mach build path/to/dir
```

{% hint style="info" %}
Replace `path/to/dir` with the directory with the files changed.

This is the tricky bit since you need to specify the directory that installs the files, which may be a parent directory of the changed file's directory. For example, to just rebuild the Lightning calendar extension:

```text
./mach build comm/calendar/lightning
```
{% endhint %}
