# Changes in Thunderbird 69-70

This document tries to cover all the changes that may by needed to make add-ons compatible with Thunderbird 70. If you find stuff that is no longer working but is not yet on this list, ask for help and advice in the mozilla.dev.apps.thunderbird newsgroup or check our [communication channels](https://wiki.mozilla.org/Thunderbird/CommunicationChannels#If_you.27re_a_developer).

The changes are grouped by category and are listed in the order we became aware of them.

## Changed API

### document.createElement\(\)

With TB69, the default namespace for createElement has switched from XUL to XHTML. So you can no longer create XUL elements with `document.createElement()` \(but XHTML elements\). To create XUL elements, use:

```javascript
document.createXULElement();
```

### nsISocketTransportService

Bug [1558726](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1558726) introduced a breaking change to the `nsISocketTransportService` interface:

The first parameter used to be an array and the second one its length. This length parameter has been dropped, causing all subsequent arguments to shift by one. Furthermore, to create a default socket, you now have to pass an empty array as first parameter, instead of null.

To stay backward compatible, check the argument count of "createTransport". In case it is 4 is is the new interface, in case it is 5 you got the old interface. Alternatively, you may also check if the version of Thunderbird is 69 or later.

```text
   if (transportService.createTransport.length === 4)
      return transportService.createTransport(((secure) ? ["starttls"] : []), host, port, proxyInfo);

    if (transportService.createTransport.length === 5) {
      if (secure)
        return transportService.createTransport(["starttls"], 1, host, port, proxyInfo);

      return transportService.createTransport(null, 0, host, port, proxyInfo);
   }

   throw new Error("Unknown Create Transport signature");
```

### window.QueryInterface\(\)

With TB70, window objects no longer have a QueryInterface. You can just remove its usage or put the call inside a `try ... catch` block to stay backward compatible. See the fix applied to [enigmail](https://gitlab.com/enigmail/enigmail/commit/cebbbc2a2f3d380e34ae8e4600f66e7986a0889d#6a57d3cb2d256247fb48986b448b6c289de8ffea).



