add-ons/updating/tb78/convert-legacy.md, before:

# Converting legacy add-ons

This guide is intended to help developers to port their add-ons to Thunderbird 78. While the intention of the guide is to simplify the porting process, porting legacy add-ons is not a straightforward process and requires a lot of time and some degree of development experience.


## Dropping the legacy key and adding new entry points

The technical conversion of a legacy add-on is ridiculously easy: just drop the `legacy` key from the `manifest.json` file.

Now your add-on should install in current versions of Thunderbird without issues, but do nothing. After all, Thunderbird no longer calls anything within your add-on. To fix that, you need one or more entry points.

There are multiple ways to get an add-on to load \(documented [in the WebExtensions course on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/Anatomy_of_a_WebExtension)\), but for a Thunderbird add-on the most common option will be adding a *background script*:
``` // manifest.json
"background": {
  "scripts": ["background-script.js"]
}
```
Adding this secton to `manifest.json` will cause the file `background-script.js` to be loaded and evaluated by Thunderbird. For bootstrapped add-ons, the existing bootstrap script itself is a good starting point for a background script – for overlayed add-ons it may be reasonable to start with an empty script and convert overlays using the guidelines below, gradually building up the background script.

Contrary to a bootstrap script in a bootstrapped add-on, background scripts will *not* get evaluated in a browser context. Instead they are added to a HTML document ("background page") living in a content process, which has access to [WebExtension APIs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API) and [MailExtension APIs](https://thunderbird-webextensions.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) throgh the `browser` and `messenger` globals. Some APIs may require specific permissions or settings to be specified within `manifest.json`, and some WebExtension APIs may be disabled or missing if they are not relevant to Thunderbird.

Any interaction with Thunderbird must occur through these APIs. Whenever code needs to be added to the background script, you need to make sure to migrate calls to XPCOM or other native Thunderbird features to these APIs.


## Experiment-ing with new APIs

While the Thunderbird team plans to add more APIs with upcoming releases, the current set of APIs will not be sufficient to port most add-ons. To work around this limitation, add-ons can introduce their own, additional APIs as so-called [*experiments*](https://thunderbird-webextensions.readthedocs.io/en/latest/how-to/experiments.html). **Any feature that was available in previous versions of Thunderbird remains available in Thunderbird 78 when using experiments.**

Experiments consist of three parts:
1. a [*schema*](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/toolkit/components/extensions/webextensions/schema.html) describes the API that can be accessed by the WebExtension part of the add-on. The schema may define functions that can be called by the add-in, events the add-in can register listeners for.
2. a *parent* implementation implements the API in Thunderbird's main process. All features that were available to a bootstrapped legacy extension can be used here.
3. a *child* implementation implements the API in the content process(es). In most cases, it will get generated automatically to call the parent implementation – but manual adjustments may be necessary if function parameters cannot be transferred to a different process (for example, if an API function accepts a function as argument).

Full examples for [a simple function with parent and child implementations](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/toolkit/components/extensions/webextensions/functions.html) and [events add-ons can listen for](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/toolkit/components/extensions/webextensions/events.html) are available in the Firefox source documentation.

As experiments run in the main process and have unrestricted access to any aspect of Thunderbird, they are expected to require updates for each new version of Thunderbird. To reduce the maintainance burden in the future, it is in your own interest to use experiments only to the extent necessary for the add-on.

Best practice: try to write APIs that would be useful for a wide range of add-ons, not just the one you're porting. That way, you can later on propose the API you designed for inclusion in Thunderbird, with your add-on serving as reference implementation. If your APIs become a part of Thunderbird, you no longer need to maintain them as part of the add-on.


## Replacing chrome.manifest

The `chrome.manifest` file is no longer supported. Many mechanisms have a more or less direct equivalent in the WebExtension world:
* **interfaces** it should no longer be necessary to use binary interfaces, as binary components are deprecated for a long time. To access custom methods on JS-implemented classes from an experiment, use `.wrappedJSObject` to get access to the raw JS implementation.
* **component**, **contract** [see section 'Replacing XPCOM registration' below](#replacing-xpcom-registration).
* **category** use [`nsICategoryManager`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en/XPCOM_Interface_Reference/nsICategoryManager) through an experiment
* **content**, **skin**, **resource** it is no longer easily possible to assign chrome://- and resource://-URLs from add-ons. However, all files of an add-on are now available through moz-extension:// URLs by default. To generate such URLs, use [`browser.runtime.getURL`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/runtime/getURL). Some WebExtension APIs also accept relative paths and generate suitable URLs automatically.
* **locale** localization for WebExtensions is handled using the [`i18n` API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/i18n), which uses a single `messages.json` file to store translations.
* **style** use an experiment to monitor open windows, and inject the style through that experiment
* **overlay** [see section 'Replacing Overlays' below](#replacing-overlays).

There are no direct equivalents to manifest flags, so add-ons now need to provide their own mechanisms to switch code or resources depending on the runtime environment. Relevant information is accessible through the [`runtime` API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/runtime/).


## Replacing Overlays

If you used XUL overlays, they are now finally gone for good and you must find an alternative. While it is technically possible to write an XUL overlay loader experiment, it is a better idea to re-evaluate the purpose of the overlay:
* For overlays extending the user interface in a way that can be replaced using calls to built-in APIs: do those calls in a background script (Example: adding context menu items)
* For overlays extending the user interface in a generalizeable way: add an experiment with an API for the generic customization (Example: adding toolbar buttons to a toolbar without an existing API; use existing toolbar APIs as reference)
* For overlays loading a script without user interface relationship: move the script's content to a background script (Example: startup script in a main window overlay)

If a part of an overlay cannot be replaced with one of the suggestions above, it may be reasonable to replace the overlay with a specific function in an experiment.


## Replacing XUL windows and dialogs

While it would be possible to attempt to re-use existing XUL code in an experiment, it is probably a better idea to use the more future-proof `windows` MailExtension API to create a window displaying an HTML dialog. From these dialogs, all WebExtension and MailExtension APIs can be accessed in the same way as from a background script.

Note that current builds of Thunderbird will, by default, display an ugly URL bar on top of all windows created through the `windows` API. Specifying the type `panel` or `detached_panel` may hide the URL bar in some future configurations. Either way, the HTML of the dialog will most likely be re-useable with any future mechanism to open windows.


## Replacing XPCOM registration

Components and contract IDs can get registered by calling [`Components.manager.registerFactory()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Tech/XPCOM/Reference/Interface/nsIComponentRegistrar#registerFactory()) from an experiment. Remember to also call [`Components.manager.unregisterFactory()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Tech/XPCOM/Reference/Interface/nsIComponentRegistrar#unregisterFactory()) when the experiment shuts down.

To get a factory implementation, copy the component's existing implementation into an experiment's parent script and use its NSGetFactory method to build a factory to register:
```
// original chrome.manifest:
component {00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000} implementation.js
contract  @example.com/contract;1 {00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000}

// original implementation.js:
var { XPCOMUtils } = ChromeUtils.import("resource://gre/modules/XPCOMUtils.jsm");
let classID = Components.ID("{00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000}");
let contractID = "@example.com/contract;1";
function exampleComponent() { /* ... implementation ... */ }
exampleComponent.prototype = { /* ... implementation ... */ };
var NSGetFactory = XPCOMUtils.generateNSGetFactory([exampleComponent]);

// new experiment.js:
/* ... */ getAPI(context) { /* ... */
  var { XPCOMUtils } = ChromeUtils.import("resource://gre/modules/XPCOMUtils.jsm");
  let classID = Components.ID("{00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000}");
  let contractID = "@example.com/contract;1";
  function exampleComponent() { /* ... implementation ... */ }
  exampleComponent.prototype = { /* ... implementation ... */ };
  let factory = XPCOMUtils.generateNSGetFactory([exampleComponent])(classId);
  Components.manager.registerFactory(classID, "exampleComponent", contractID,
    factory);
  context.callOnClose({close(){
    Components.manager.unregisterFactory(classID, factory);
  }});
/* ... */ } /* ... */
```

## Replacing various discontinued features within experiment code

Many parts of XUL are discontinued, and there are some other changes that prevent legacy code to run unchanged in an experiment. [A separate article deals with these changes.](changes.md)

Commit message:

Extend legacy porting guide (options, cloning)
This commit extends the legacy porting guide, including some additional
pointers to relevant content:

- added a note about structured cloning and hinting towards function
  exporting in the section about child implementations of experiments.
  While not needed for simple examples, there are quite a few situations
  in which they become relevant (for example in any async API, as the
  Error class is not supported for structural cloning).

- added a section about options, which were overlooked in the first
  draft.

- added links to referenced APIs for windows / dialogs

add-ons/updating/tb78/convert-legacy.md, after:

# Converting legacy add-ons

This guide is intended to help developers to port their add-ons to Thunderbird 78. While the intention of the guide is to simplify the porting process, porting legacy add-ons is not a straightforward process and requires a lot of time and some degree of development experience.


## Dropping the legacy key and adding new entry points

The technical conversion of a legacy add-on is ridiculously easy: just drop the `legacy` key from the `manifest.json` file.

Now your add-on should install in current versions of Thunderbird without issues, but do nothing. After all, Thunderbird no longer calls anything within your add-on. To fix that, you need one or more entry points.

There are multiple ways to get an add-on to load \(documented [in the WebExtensions course on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/Anatomy_of_a_WebExtension)\), but for a Thunderbird add-on the most common option will be adding a *background script*:
``` // manifest.json
"background": {
  "scripts": ["background-script.js"]
}
```
Adding this secton to `manifest.json` will cause the file `background-script.js` to be loaded and evaluated by Thunderbird. For bootstrapped add-ons, the existing bootstrap script itself is a good starting point for a background script – for overlayed add-ons it may be reasonable to start with an empty script and convert overlays using the guidelines below, gradually building up the background script.

Contrary to a bootstrap script in a bootstrapped add-on, background scripts will *not* get evaluated in a browser context. Instead they are added to a HTML document ("background page") living in a content process, which has access to [WebExtension APIs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API) and [MailExtension APIs](https://thunderbird-webextensions.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) throgh the `browser` and `messenger` globals. Some APIs may require specific permissions or settings to be specified within `manifest.json`, and some WebExtension APIs may be disabled or missing if they are not relevant to Thunderbird.

Any interaction with Thunderbird must occur through these APIs. Whenever code needs to be added to the background script, you need to make sure to migrate calls to XPCOM or other native Thunderbird features to these APIs.


## Experiment-ing with new APIs

While the Thunderbird team plans to add more APIs with upcoming releases, the current set of APIs will not be sufficient to port most add-ons. To work around this limitation, add-ons can introduce their own, additional APIs as so-called [*experiments*](https://thunderbird-webextensions.readthedocs.io/en/latest/how-to/experiments.html). **Any feature that was available in previous versions of Thunderbird remains available in Thunderbird 78 when using experiments.**

Experiments consist of three parts:
1. a [*schema*](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/toolkit/components/extensions/webextensions/schema.html) describes the API that can be accessed by the WebExtension part of the add-on. The schema may define functions that can be called by the add-in, events the add-in can register listeners for.
2. a *parent* implementation implements the API in Thunderbird's main process. All features that were available to a bootstrapped legacy extension can be used here.
3. a *child* implementation implements the API in the content process(es). In most cases, it will get generated automatically to call the parent implementation – but manual adjustments may be necessary if function parameters cannot be transferred to a different process (for example, if an API function accepts a function as argument). If the API does not need to interact with anything running in the main thread, it is also possible to implement an API completely within the child implementation.
You may need to use [`Components.utils.cloneInto()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Tech/XPCOM/Language_Bindings/Components.utils.cloneInto) or a related function to clone return values into `context.cloneScope` if the [structured clone algorithm](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API/Structured_clone_algorithm) does not support them and the objects were not created using constructors within `context.cloneScope`, as unprivileged code is, by default, not permitted to access objects created from privileged code.

Full examples for [a simple function with parent and child implementations](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/toolkit/components/extensions/webextensions/functions.html) and [events add-ons can listen for](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/toolkit/components/extensions/webextensions/events.html) are available in the Firefox source documentation.

As experiments run in the main process and have unrestricted access to any aspect of Thunderbird, they are expected to require updates for each new version of Thunderbird. To reduce the maintainance burden in the future, it is in your own interest to use experiments only to the extent necessary for the add-on.

Best practice: try to write APIs that would be useful for a wide range of add-ons, not just the one you're porting. That way, you can later on propose the API you designed for inclusion in Thunderbird, with your add-on serving as reference implementation. If your APIs become a part of Thunderbird, you no longer need to maintain them as part of the add-on.


## Replacing options

Option windows are replaced by [settings pages](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/Implement_a_settings_page) defined in `manifest.json`:
```
"options_ui": {
  "page": "options.html"
},
```
Instead of an XUL dialog, use the specified HTML document will be accessible to the user through the Add-on manager. From that document, all WebExtension and MailExtension APIs can be accessed in the same way as form a background script. The settings themselves should be stored using one of the new APIs to store data, such as [`storage`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/storage), so it may be necessary to add an experiment to migrate existing settings from nsIPrefBranch or other mechanisms not accessible through modern APIs.


## Replacing chrome.manifest

The `chrome.manifest` file is no longer supported. Many mechanisms have a more or less direct equivalent in the WebExtension world:
* **interfaces** it should no longer be necessary to use binary interfaces, as binary components are deprecated for a long time. To access custom methods on JS-implemented classes from an experiment, use `.wrappedJSObject` to get access to the raw JS implementation.
* **component**, **contract** [see section 'Replacing XPCOM registration' below](#replacing-xpcom-registration).
* **category** use [`nsICategoryManager`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en/XPCOM_Interface_Reference/nsICategoryManager) through an experiment
* **content**, **skin**, **resource** it is no longer easily possible to assign chrome://- and resource://-URLs from add-ons. However, all files of an add-on are now available through moz-extension:// URLs by default. To generate such URLs, use [`browser.runtime.getURL`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/runtime/getURL). Some WebExtension APIs also accept relative paths and generate suitable URLs automatically.
* **locale** localization for WebExtensions is handled using the [`i18n` API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/i18n), which uses a single `messages.json` file to store translations.
* **style** use an experiment to monitor open windows, and inject the style through that experiment
* **overlay** [see section 'Replacing Overlays' below](#replacing-overlays).

There are no direct equivalents to manifest flags, so add-ons now need to provide their own mechanisms to switch code or resources depending on the runtime environment. Relevant information is accessible through the [`runtime` API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/runtime/).


## Replacing Overlays

If you used XUL overlays, they are now finally gone for good and you must find an alternative. While it is technically possible to write an XUL overlay loader experiment, it is a better idea to re-evaluate the purpose of the overlay:
* For overlays extending the user interface in a way that can be replaced using calls to built-in APIs: do those calls in a background script (Example: adding context menu items)
* For overlays extending the user interface in a generalizeable way: add an experiment with an API for the generic customization (Example: adding toolbar buttons to a toolbar without an existing API; use existing toolbar APIs as reference)
* For overlays loading a script without user interface relationship: move the script's content to a background script (Example: startup script in a main window overlay)

If a part of an overlay cannot be replaced with one of the suggestions above, it may be reasonable to replace the overlay with a specific function in an experiment.


## Replacing XUL windows and dialogs

While it would be possible to attempt to re-use existing XUL code in an experiment, it is probably a better idea to use the more future-proof [`windows` MailExtension API](https://thunderbird-webextensions.readthedocs.io/en/latest/windows.html) to create a window displaying an HTML dialog. From these dialogs, all WebExtension and MailExtension APIs can be accessed in the same way as from a background script.

Note that current builds of Thunderbird will, by default, display an ugly URL bar on top of all windows created through the `windows` API. Specifying the type `panel` or `detached_panel` may hide the URL bar in some future configurations. Either way, the HTML of the dialog will most likely be re-useable with any future mechanism to open windows.


## Replacing XPCOM registration

Components and contract IDs can get registered by calling [`Components.manager.registerFactory()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Tech/XPCOM/Reference/Interface/nsIComponentRegistrar#registerFactory()) from an experiment. Remember to also call [`Components.manager.unregisterFactory()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Tech/XPCOM/Reference/Interface/nsIComponentRegistrar#unregisterFactory()) when the experiment shuts down.

To get a factory implementation, copy the component's existing implementation into an experiment's parent script and use its NSGetFactory method to build a factory to register:
```
// original chrome.manifest:
component {00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000} implementation.js
contract  @example.com/contract;1 {00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000}

// original implementation.js:
var { XPCOMUtils } = ChromeUtils.import("resource://gre/modules/XPCOMUtils.jsm");
let classID = Components.ID("{00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000}");
let contractID = "@example.com/contract;1";
function exampleComponent() { /* ... implementation ... */ }
exampleComponent.prototype = { /* ... implementation ... */ };
var NSGetFactory = XPCOMUtils.generateNSGetFactory([exampleComponent]);

// new experiment.js:
/* ... */ getAPI(context) { /* ... */
  var { XPCOMUtils } = ChromeUtils.import("resource://gre/modules/XPCOMUtils.jsm");
  let classID = Components.ID("{00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000}");
  let contractID = "@example.com/contract;1";
  function exampleComponent() { /* ... implementation ... */ }
  exampleComponent.prototype = { /* ... implementation ... */ };
  let factory = XPCOMUtils.generateNSGetFactory([exampleComponent])(classId);
  Components.manager.registerFactory(classID, "exampleComponent", contractID,
    factory);
  context.callOnClose({close(){
    Components.manager.unregisterFactory(classID, factory);
  }});
/* ... */ } /* ... */
```

## Replacing various discontinued features within experiment code

Many parts of XUL are discontinued, and there are some other changes that prevent legacy code to run unchanged in an experiment. [A separate article deals with these changes.](changes.md)
